Good to see each one of you.
If you have your Bibles, let's pull them out.
We're stepping into our teaching time together today.
And we're going to be in Isaiah 40 as we continue on in our series that we've been in in the book of Isaiah.
One of the most difficult things in life is when, well, when difficult things don't end.
Most can put up with just about anything for a short stint, but
Enduring ongoing chronic trials or discouragement, that's a whole other challenge, right?
Some of you know the challenge is involved in battling, ongoing challenges involved in battling, ongoing health issues, for example.
I mean, it seems like the older I get, it's like one thing after another leads to another, it's like everything's coming apart.
Maybe it's long chapters of heartache that you are enduring in an unhealthy marriage.
Maybe it's prolonged discouragement period that's coming from a negative work situation where you're just stressed with coworkers, always tension in the air.
Some have chronic financial stress and frustration.
It's been said that discouragement usually isn't born in a single bad day.
It's born in the 1,000th day of the same struggle.
When it feels like life is an uphill battle, we can become weary and we can become discouraged.
It simply wears us down over time.
And the longer periods of discouragement go, the more difficult it is to
to try to pop up and stay positive and have hope and have an attitude that's positive.
Imagine hiking with a backpack that someone secretly adds rocks to every mile.
At first you can manage fine, I got this, right?
Then your shoulders start to ache, then you slow down and eventually you wonder if you can keep going at all.
what prolonged hardship feels like, slowly increasing emotional and spiritual weight.
If you find yourself in that type of situation today, then Isaiah has a message for you, and you're gonna be really glad you came to church today.
Message Isaiah brings today as one of those encouraging and refreshing parts of the entire Bible.
Today, Isaiah reminds us that God never, ever, ever forgets us.
In fact, He's committed to renewing us, reviving us and restoring us ultimately.
So if you have your Bibles open to Isaiah 40, let's start there.
Let me start a little context for this first.
In many ways, the book of Isaiah is the Bible in miniature, the Bible in miniature.
Like the Bible, the book has two major divisions and like the Bible, the main theme of the first part is more judgment and the main theme of the second is hope.
So in our study of Isaiah, today chapter 40 begins a whole new section of the book.
Now it's interesting to note that the historical time context for Isaiah 40 through the end, 40 through 66, it's an entirely different timeframe than the first 39 chapters.
As chapter 40 opens, it's addressing issues that happened about 300 years after chapter 39.
Obviously Isaiah was not alive then.
Scholars have offered different explanations for this, but to me the best explanation is that God has given, divinely given, Isaiah the ability to see into the future and speak to the hearts of those who will live through the coming decimation and exile of Judah at the hands of the Babylonians in 586 BC.
Bottom line, here's what I want you to hold on and it hold into your brains.
As we come to Isaiah 40, Isaiah is addressing a people who will become very familiar with hardship, discouragement, prolonged challenges in their lives.
But Isaiah is assuring them.
God has not forgotten you and he has not abandoned you.
Your restoration is coming.
This message was as vital for them in those days as it is for us in our day.
As you remember, from the first half of our series, Isaiah one to 39 was very heavy on warning and judgment.
It emphasized God as holy and just, worthy of obedience.
But now, beginning with Isaiah 40, the prophecy shifts to consolation, to hope, promise, and God as redeemer and comforter.
It's a great day to be in church.
Let's start in chapter 40 verse one.
Get ourselves started.
Isaiah writes, comfort, comfort my people, says your God.
Speak tenderly to Jerusalem and proclaim to her that her hard service has been completed, that her sin has been paid for, and she has received from the Lord's hand double for all her sins.
A voice of one calling, a voice of one calling in the wilderness, prepare
the way for the Lord.
Make straight in the desert a highway for our God.
Every valley shall be raised up, every mountain and hill made low, the rough ground should become level, the rugged places a plain.
And the glory of the Lord will be revealed and all the people will see it together for the mouth of the Lord has spoken in.
Comfort in Hebrew means to turn away suffering, either by ending the suffering
taking the suffering away, or by coming alongside and helping a person through it.
Once God calls out to comfort his people, friends, it's as good as done.
The repetition of comfort indicates urgency.
To be certain, the exile will bring tremendous suffering on his people, but now he's saying, when their suffering comes to an end, when it's complete, when their discipline is over,
When they have endured double trouble for all their sins, now it's restoration time.
Now it's restoration time.
Comfort, tender care, renewal is coming.
The restoration starts with a declaration that one is coming who will fully resolve their sin issues and lead them back to their God.
They will recognize this Savior who's coming because one will precede him and will continue to prepare a way for the deliverer.
Then the text says, the glory of the Lord will be revealed.
Sound familiar?
Some of you, huh?
These verses might sound familiar because all four gospel writers use them to refer to the ministry of John the Baptist and introduce the ministry of John the Baptist.
In fact, in John,
The Baptist himself quotes it and says, I am the voice of the one calling in the wilderness.
Isaiah wants to target those who are feeling way down, worn out, run down from the burdens in their lives.
Those who are struggling and stumbling, he wants them to take heart.
God is about to reveal something big.
So discouraged heart, disappointed heart, perk up.
Lift your head.
and be encouraged.
But if you've been in a series of long struggle and of discouragement, you might say, well, how can I know it's true?
How can I know it will happen?
How can I be so sure this promise is real?
Look at verse six, a voice says cry out and I said, what shall I cry?
All people are like grass and all their faithfulness is like the flowers of the field.
The grass withers and the flowers fall because the breath of the Lord blows on them.
Surely the people are grass.
The grass withers and the flowers fall, but the word of our God endures what people?
Forever.
See, God is not calling us to place our hope in some sort of human ingenuity.
He's not asking us to trust others like government or politicians or the latest technology.
He's not asking us to hope in our human strength and he's certainly not expecting us to hope in our own ability.
You see, the charge to take heart, to take comfort is not based on the power of positive thinking.
It's not about pulling yourself up by your own bootstraps.
or practicing the latest principles of Tony Robbins or any other successes in the mind or power positive thinking motivational podcast.
Friends, here's the reality.
Life is crazy at times.
Crazy.
Men's efforts have very finite limits.
You know this.
We're like grass.
We're like the grass in these foothills.
Boy, if you come through here in the spring, you're like,
This is so beautiful.
It's so green rolling hills.
Well, just come back in June.
Right?
Whenever we had a higher staff, I always try to candidate him like, you know, in April, May.
One guy asked me, is it always look like this?
I'm like, oh, yeah.
Isaiah makes a powerful contrast here.
He contrasts the helplessness of humankind
with the infinitely powerful word and presence of God.
Friends, here's the point.
The basis for taking heart in all of this, the basis for being encouraged and taking comfort is because the unfailing, everlasting word of God is behind it.
Yay?
There's no sure guarantee than that.
Always remember this, God's word is his work
is his person.
Theology 101, God's Word is his work, is his person.
There's no difference between what he says he will do and what he does.
All our efforts as people are finite, limited, and frail, but friends, God is absolutely majestic in everlasting.
When he says it, he's doing it.
And God is so excited about this message of comfort and restoration and healing.
He wants it to be shouted from the mountaintops.
Look at verse nine.
You who bring good news to Zion go up on high mountain.
You who bring good news to Jerusalem lift up your voice with a shout.
Lift it up.
Don't be afraid.
Say to the towns of Judah, here's your God.
See the sovereign Lord comes with power and rules with a mighty arm.
See his reward is with him and his recompense accompanies him.
He tends his flock like a shepherd.
He gathers the lambs in his arms.
He carries them close to his heart.
He gently leads those who have young.
Man, as I said in the past weeks, our series in Isaiah, I think you will agree, we've heard a tremendous number of tough warnings, right?
Tough warnings, judgments being declared from God, but now
More clearly and loudly than the word of judgment, the word of comfort and hope is to be proclaimed.
Certainly God is all powerful and majestic, the God of the universe, but though he is that, he is gentle like a shepherd.
You marry these two things in your head, he's gentle like a shepherd as he tenderly cares for those flock.
Look again, nose verse 11, he's a gentle shepherd gathering lambs in his arm
carrying them close to his heart, like cuddling them, gently leading them.
Friends, that's what he does with you.
You believe it?
For sure our God is holy and just, but here Isaiah is reminding us, friends, he's gentle.
Don't forget, he's tender, so kind, so loving.
This is the message he wants to resonate in their hearts.
The New Testament speaks to the specifics and the minutiae of this tender care from our magnificent God.
It actually comprehends the smallest bird and the finest hair of your thinning head, right?
Look at the text with me, are not too sparrow so for a penny, yet not one of them will fall to the ground apart from the will of your father.
And even the very hairs of your head.
are all numbered.
So don't be afraid.
You are worth far more.
You hear it?
Don't be afraid.
You are worth far more.
So to be sure, our God is a tender, gentle shepherd, but make no mistake, that doesn't mean he's a lightweight.
He's not weak.
We're not placing our hope in some namby, pamby, wishy, washy God.
Our confidence in his promises can be strengthened as we remember how all powerful and capable he is.
Notice what Isaiah declares in verse 12. Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand?
Or would the breath of his hand marked off the heavens?
Who has held the dust of the earth in a basket or weighed the mountains on the scales?
and the hills and the balance.
Who can fathom the spirit of the Lord or instruct the Lord as a counselor?
Whom did the Lord consult to enlighten him?
And who taught him the right way?
Who was it that taught him knowledge or showed him the path of understanding?
Surely the nations are like a drop in the bucket.
They're regarded as dust on the scales.
He weighs the islands as though they were fine dust.
Lebanon is not sufficient for altar fires, nor its animals, enough for burnt offerings.
Before him all the nations are as what?
Nothing.
They're regarded by him as worthless, less than nothing.
With whom then will you compare God?
To what image will you liken him?
As for an idol, a metalworker casts it and the goldsmith overlays it with gold and fashioned silver chains for it.
A person too poor to present such an offering selects wood that will not rot.
They look for a skilled worker to set up an idol that will not topple down.
Do you not know?
Have you not heard?
Has it not been told you from the beginning?
Have you not understood since the earth was founded?
He sits and thrown above the circle of the earth and its people are like grasshoppers.
He stretches out the heavens like a canopy and spreads them out like a tent to live in.
He brings princes to not and reduces the rulers of this world to nothing.
No sooner are they planted, no sooner are they sown, no sooner do they take root in the ground, then he blows on them and they wither.
A whirlwind sweeps them away like chaff.
To whom will you compare me, God says, who is my equal?
lift up your eyes and look to the heavens.
Who created all these?
He who brings out the story hosts one by one and calls forth each of them by name because of his great strength, power and mighty strength.
Not one of them is missing.
Right?
Friends, he's absolutely incomparable.
I cannot find words to describe it.
This is one of the central Old Testament passages on creation.
Every last minute bit of creation was measured out, weighed out, and placed out by God.
All in the unbounded, unsurpassed wisdom of God who did not need anyone to fine tune his efforts.
God originates everything, maintains everything, controls the operation of everything,
and directs all of it to the end he appoints.
And what's more, the text says that creation in all its glory, we know how beautiful our creation is, beautiful our world is.
But despite how amazing our creation is in all of its glory, it's a drop in the bucket.
The text says it's less than nothing.
Isaiah is not implying that creation is bad or that humankind has no value, but compared to the supreme majesty of God and creation and even humankind in all its glory pales in comparison.
So with all of this being true, there's no need for you or for me to fret or wring our hands
or let ourselves ever think that God has forgotten us.
You with me?
We don't ever have to worry or think that he's disregarded us or somehow isn't paying attention and isn't capable of renewing us and reviving us.
I just don't know if he's there for me.
What?
Look at verse 27.
This is what Isaiah says.
Why do you complain Jacob?
Why do you say Israel?
My way is hidden from the Lord.
My cause is disregarded by my God.
Do you not know?
Have you not heard?
The Lord is the everlasting God, the creator of the ends of the earth.
He will not grow tired or weary and his understanding.
No one can fathom.
He gives strength to the weary and increases the power of the weak.
Even youths grow tired and weary and young men stumble and fall, but those who watch church hope, hope in the Lord will renew their strength.
Do you hear that?
They will soar on wings like eagles.
They will run and not grow weary.
They will walk and not be faint.
I think just about every one of us have been in seasons of our lives where we wondered, is God
paying attention, right?
I haven't heard anything from him in a while.
Not really sure what he's thinking.
This whole sitch doesn't feel like it's gonna change, right?
I think he's overlooked me.
We get into tough situations in life and they go on and on for a while and we pray and we wait and we start to get a little frustrated
And then we say to ourselves, I don't think God's hearing me.
I don't think he sees me.
Here's how the internal progression can go.
I think I have it on the screen for you.
Yes, no, maybe so.
Here's how it's how it can roll that out.
We all start out with faith.
God will handle this, right?
Whatever challenge we're coming to, whatever season we're coming to, we think God will handle this, right?
Then notice what happens.
Then after a while, nothing really changes and we start to wonder, why hasn't this changed yet?
I mean, I've been praying, praying, praying.
Why hasn't he changed it yet?
And then notice what happens.
Then we start getting tired, right?
We start getting tired.
And we just think to ourselves, God, I am exhausted.
And then notice what happens.
Then we slide into discouragement.
Maybe nothing's ever gonna change.
Right?
And then notice to end.
Then distorted thinking slides in.
And we start to think ourselves, I don't think he sees me.
I don't think he sees me.
Here's something important to keep in mind, friend.
Friends, the hardest trials in life are rarely the explosive ones.
The hardest trials in life are the slow ones.
The ones that last months or years where you wake up every morning and the situation is still there.
And somewhere along the way, exhaustion starts to whisper lies about God.
I wonder if he's forgotten about me.
And to that question, Isaiah asks, how can you think that
No, no, no, no, no.
How can you think that?
That's a lie from the pit of hell.
Here's the truth.
Here's the truth that counters that lie.
Don't you know?
He says, haven't you heard?
And look at his description of God.
Look at your text again.
The Lord is everlasting.
God is tireless.
How many of you thought I think God's tired of hearing me pray this same prayer?
How many?
Yeah.
Nope.
tireless, limitless, his understanding limitless.
I don't know if God gets me, huh?
He gives power and strength to all who hope in him.
Friends, this type of renewal, it all starts by opening your heart to Jesus.
Many of you know this already, but there might be some of you in the room, you've been in a season of discouragement, and you're kind of wondering, where do I start?
It starts by opening your heart to Jesus.
This text assures us that this kind of personalized care, this renewal from the God of the universe is available to each person who hopes in God.
And hope in God starts by placing your trust in God's Son Jesus.
Have you done that yet?
If not, this is your first important takeaway
from this sermon today.
That's your first important takeaway from this whole message today.
Jesus himself said, no one comes to the Father except through me.
And when you walk with Jesus and you put your hope in him, he leads you like a gentle shepherd loving on you tenderly and renewing you through the struggles and disappointments in your life.
Notice I said through.
For some of you today, this is where it can all begin to change.
Right here.
Today you can open your heart to Jesus and ask Him to be your forgiver and your leader.
Today could be the day for you.
We're all changes.
And when you do that, the Bible tells us the spirit literally sets up his residence in you and makes you his own, embraces you, makes you his own.
Then he goes to work on you.
Sometimes he changes your circumstances.
Sometimes he changes circumstances.
But often, He changes you.
He gives you everything you need so you're not fighting the battles in your own strength anymore.
When you open your heart to Him, and many of you already had, let me suggest three other very practical takeaways because maybe even though you've been following Jesus for a while, you're in a hard season.
And you haven't been able to break out of it.
So let me suggest three practical things.
Number one, remember who God is.
Refocus your mind before you try to fix your situation.
Here's why I say that.
Notice Isaiah 40 spends far more time describing God than solving Israel's problems.
Did you catch that?
That's not accidental.
Because here's the truth.
Weariness shrinks our vision.
You with me?
Knowing God restores it.
Oh, come on, that's good.
You got social media.
You need this time out.
You need to post that right now.
Go ahead, post that.
Weariness shrinks your vision.
Knowing God restores it.
So here's a practice you can try this week.
Spend some time this week reading through these verses, verses 12 to 31.
Just make a note in your outline, read through 12 to 31, read through it slowly.
I had to read it fast because we've got a whole time thing.
Spend some time reading through those verses slowly.
Write down every description of God you see.
Creator, shepherd, everlasting, powerful, attentive, whatever you see in there.
Whatever God reveals to you.
Then when discouraging thoughts come, begin to intentionally replace them with one of those truths about God's character that you found.
Okay, very practical.
Very practical.
Read through the verses, write down the scriptures, use them, replace them.
Remember, your strength will not return simply because your circumstances improve.
Your strength is not gonna return because your circumstances improve.
Your strength returns when your vision improves.
Your strength improves when your vision of God grows bigger than your circumstances.
You with me?
So we gotta grow it.
All right, secondly, practice waiting on the Lord with bite-sized faithfulness.
Right?
Here's why I'm saying bite-sized.
When people are exhausted,
They often think they need some sort of massive, dramatic spiritual breakthrough.
Whoa, I've changed.
But notice Isaiah's promise is for who?
Those who simply wait.
Huh?
God is not asking you for impressive faith.
He's inviting you to dependent faith.
So maybe try some bite-sized spiritual practices because that's all the energy you got in this particular season.
Maybe it's a short daily prayer, something like this.
This is your daily prayer.
Lord, I'm tired.
Be my strength.
Lord, I'm tired, be my strength.
You might pray that 20 times a day.
Lord, I'm tired.
Be my strength.
Maybe read one Psalm a day.
Pick a short one.
It's okay.
Not impressive faith, just dependent faith.
Listen to worship music during your commute.
Or maybe try this one.
Sit quietly before God for five minutes before bed.
Turn off your devices, turn off your TV, turn off all the noise.
Just sit, maybe in a dark room, maybe not, maybe just sit by yourself.
Silence, solitude, five minutes before bed.
You don't have to think anything.
You don't have to pray anything.
You don't have to ask God anything.
Just sit with Him.
Sit with your gentle shepherd.
See, the goal isn't intensity, it's connection.
Lastly, just take the next step, not the whole journey.
Take the next step.
Remember what Isaiah said, walk and not faint, right?
Run, not grow weary.
Mount up with wings like eagles.
See what's interesting about that?
Notice it's all movement, but all at different speeds.
You ever notice that?
It's progression.
It starts small.
So what's the next faithful thing God is asking of you?
God, what's the next thing you need me to do?
Not tomorrow, not next month, not next week, today.
Maybe it's just, make a phone call.
Make a phone call, reach out to somebody to encourage them or to be encouraged.
Ask them to pray.
Maybe it's just one thing, that very next thing is just show up at church.
You did it.
Maybe decide to forgive one person.
It's a long process maybe, but you're choosing to free them and you're choosing to free yourself from the poison of that resentment.
Maybe it's just pray one honest prayer.
Just pray one honest prayer.
Remember how Jesus taught us to pray.
He said, give us this day our what?
Daily.
Not next week, not next month.
So you don't need strength for tomorrow yet.
You need strength for today, yeah?
Yeah?
God gives strength in daily portions.
And when people feel hopeless, the future feels overwhelming, but God gives strength for the next step, not the entire path.
Be encouraged.
Some of you came in today tired in your soul, weary.
You love God.
Maybe you just felt a draw to be here, but you're worn down.
Please realize your weariness does not disqualify you from God's promises.
The opposite, it qualifies you for them.
The promises I say it gives today were not meant for the strong.
You notice that?
There for the weary who wait.
The weary who wait.
So if you're weary of trying to make life work on your own,
I'd invite you to open your heart to Him, open your heart to Jesus, maybe today's the very first time.
You can pray something like this, not about the right words, we always say that, but these are just, maybe your heart resonates with this, and maybe you're so tired, you can't put words together yourself.
This might be helpful to you.
Jesus, thanks for loving me no matter what.
I realized today how tired I am, trying to make life work on my own.
I really need you.
I need you to forgive my sin.
I need you to fill me with your spirit.
I need you and want to follow your leadership in my life from this day forward.
Maybe you're so tired, that seems like too many words.
Maybe for you it's just help me Jesus.
Help me.
Let's pray.
Lord, thank you for my friends who made it a priority to be here today.
And I pray that you will absolutely maximize your truth in their hearts and in their lives and their spirits today.
I pray for any in the room who may be resonated with that prayer, and it's the very first time they have ever called out to you to be their forgiver, opened their hearts to you as their leader.
Thank you for hearing them.
Thank you for responding to that.
You always promise to respond to every prayer for deliverance, salvation, forgiveness, healing.
And so thank you for hearing them.
And I want to pray for your kids, Lord, that are in this room who've been following you for a long time and they're in a season.
They're in a season.
And it's dragged on longer than any other season they've ever had in their lives.
And it's stretching their trust muscle.
It's stretching them and their ability to stay positive and stay hopeful.
I'm so glad they're here today.
And I know you're glad they're here.
And I pray that you would refresh and revive them
through the power and presence of your spirit.
Strengthen them in their inner being.
Give them everything they need to continue to step forward.
Full of hope, even though they're weary.
Full of hope in you.
So I push them into your lap, Lord Jesus, our tender shepherd.
In your name, amen.
All right.
So, glad you came to church.
Isaiah 40, huh?
Yeah, read it, live it, love it.
All right, stand up with me as we prepare to go.
And if you came today prepared to worship through the giving of your tithes and offerings, the black boxes are by the wall on your way out, just like to remind you of that.
Otherwise, greet one another as you go.
Maybe meet a new person.
It's nice weather out there.
Meet a new friend, greet an old one.
Have a great week.
See you back next time.